Data architecture

A data architect is a person designated to be responsible for the design, structure, organization, and maintenance of data for a particular company or project. Just as an architect carefully designs the blueprints for a building, a data architect carefully maps out the structure and organization of the relevant data for a company or project. A data architect can work for a single company and focus entirely on internal data or work for a database group and assist multiple companies with their data.

A data architect fills a number of roles and maintains a number of responsibilities. The data architect is responsible for evaluating the use of data and relating data directly to the goals and practices of a company in a way that provides clear results. The data architect must ensure the accuracy and accessibility of all important data, and he or she is responsible for knowing what data is important and why. The data architect often acts as a middleman, deducing the data needs of a particular group and explaining the importance and use of the data most relevant to them.

There are a number of tools that a data architect uses throughout his or her career. Beyond basic databases, a data architect often creates something called a metadata registry. This is in a sense a database that catalogs what data is available as opposed to cataloging the actual data. A metadata registry can organize data on a much more massive scale than a basic database, because it is not required to contain the information itself, but only to reference it.

Nearly all data architects are familiar with data-oriented computer languages such as SQL. In an attempt to simplify a rather complicated system, SQL is a data querying language based on retrieving data stored according to mathematical relations. Rather than storing numbers, SQL databases represent all types of information in mathematical terms and use mathematical tools to sort the information. Other data-oriented languages, such as XML, are likely to be regular tools of a data architect. The data architect is a new profession made possible by the increasingly massive capacity for computerized data collection, and it will likely continue to gain popularity as more and more information requires large-scale organization.

Designers of data architecture for everything from government databases to the file systems on personal computers must consider data integrity when working on such systems. They think about the way the system will be used, identify obvious potential threats, and develop methods for securing the system to protect the data. Failure to think ahead can result in catastrophic compromises and the potential inadvertent release of secure or sensitive data, an especially large concern with databases containing personal or identifiable information about individuals and institutions.

People working with databases may be provided with training in data integrity, including reminders to review data as it is entered, to regularly save and back up data, and to report any suspected compromises or questionable activities immediately. The more quickly a problem is recognized, the easier it will be to address. Support personnel, such as information technology staff, also work on protecting databases from outside attacks with tools like firewalls, antivirus software, and periodic scans for malicious code. Likewise, systems can also be designed to lock data in read-only format to protect it from tampering or interference that might compromise its integrity.
